1   BLACK SCREEN                                                   1

    TITLES BEGIN over the SOUNDS of city traffic.

                                                    FADE UP:


2   EXT. THEATER DISTRICT OF BROADWAY - DUSK                       2

    The sidewalks are filled with theater-goers heading for
    their shows. Cabs line the streets.

    SIDE ALLEY

    A cab quickly turns into the alley, coming to a
    screeching halt. A Man in a Grey Suit jumps out and
    rushes to the side entrance of a theater.

    In the background we see that the title of the play,
    "Anonymous", is written on the theatre's marquee...


3   INT. BROADWAY THEATER - BACKSTAGE - DUSK                       3

    We follow the Man in the Grey Suit as he rushes through
    narrow backstage hallways, passing several ACTORS
    dressing in Elizabethan costumes, applying their make-
    up, etc...

    TITLES CONTINUE.


4   INT. BROADWAY THEATER - BACKSTAGE/EMPTY STAGE - DUSK           4

    The curtains are still closed, and the sound of the
    audience excitedly MURMURING behind them is heard. .

    Stagehands are moving stage lights as--

    A STAGE MANAGER

    takes a nervous peek through the curtains to check the
    audience-- it's a full house. He holds a prop umbrella
    in one hand, anxiously checks his watch in the other.

    He looks on both wings of the stage-- and then relief
    floods his face as he sees The Man in the Grey Suit
    hurrying over to him. The Stage Manager wordlessly
    hands him the umbrella and signals to a stagehand in
    the background.

    The curtains start to OPEN and the MURMUR of the
    audience dies down.


                                                               1
                                                     pg. 2


5   INT. BROADWAY THEATER - THE STAGE - CONTINUOUS                5

    The man with the umbrella stands on the empty stage, a
    single light on him. He is "PROLOGUE". (We will see
    the same actor later as the "Prologue" of Henry V).

    "Prologue" regards his audience for a   beat before:

                              PROLOGUE
                Soul of the Age!
                The applause, delight, the wonder of
                our stage!
                Our Shakespeare, rise...
                       (beat, repeating)
                Our Shakespeare... For he is all of
                ours, is he not? The most performed
                playwright of all time! The author of
                37 plays, 154 sonnets, and several
                epic poems that are collectively known
                as the ultimate expressions of
                humanity in the English language. And
                yet... And yet...
                       (beat)
                Not a single manuscript of any kind
                has ever been found written in
                Shakespeare's own hand. In four
                hundred years, not one document-- be
                it poem, play, diary or even a simple
                letter.
                       (beat)
                He was born the son of a glove-maker,
                and at some unknown time, armed with
                but an elementary school education, he
                went to London where, the story goes,
                he became an actor and eventually a
                playwright.

    OFF STAGE

    A stagehand takes a wooden hammer and beats against a
    flat metal pate, creating the SOUNDS of THUNDER.

    Another stagehand starts to lift shutters in front of a
    stage light back and forth to create LIGHTNING STRIKES.

    ON STAGE

    "Prologue" opens his umbrella.

                             PROLOGUE (CONT'D)
                He died at the age of 56, and was
                survived by his wife and two daughters
                who were, like Shakespeare's own
                father, irrefutably illiterate.

                                                              2
                                                 pg. 3


OFF STAGE

In the rafters a stagehand opens valves.   It starts to
RAIN.

                         PROLOGUE (O.C.) (CONT'D)
            His will famously left his second best
            bed to his widow. But it made no
            mention of a single book or
            manuscript.

The actor who will play "Ben JONSON" (mid 30's) appears
in the wings, bearded, ready to go on stage, holding a
prop leather manuscript. Behind him a group of
Elizabethan "soldiers" strap on their swords.

ON STAGE

"Prologue" continues, as do TITLES.

                         PROLOGUE (CONT'D)
            Is it possible Shakespeare owned no
            books at his death because... he could
            not read? That he wrote no letters
            because he, like his father before him
            and his children after him, could not
            write?
                   (lets that sink in, then)
            Our Shakespeare is a cypher, a ghost;
            his biography made not by history...
            but by conjecture. His story not
            written with facts, but with...
            imagination.

The rain has intensified. "Prologue" turns and the
camera starts to leave him and the TITLES END....

                         PROLOGUE (CONT'D)
                   (more energetic)
            So! Let me offer you a different
            story. A darker story... Of quills
            and swords. Of power and betrayal.
            Of a stage conquered, and a throne
            lost!

A FLASH OF LIGHTNING, and for a moment only sheets of
RAIN are visible. No stage, no "Prologue". Then,
trough the rain, we see a form of a man... Ben
Jonson... running. Then we make out the shapes of
houses... a street. We're not on a stage anymore. We
are:




                                                          3
                                                      pg. 4


6    EXT. BANKSIDE LONDON - 1604 NIGHT                             6

     Jonson-- carrying the manuscript-- runs up the street
     toward a large circular theater.

     He frantically opens the wooden door to the theater--


7    INT. THE ROSE THEATER - NIGHT                                 7

     --and he quickly bolts it behind him, turns, and
     desperately looks for a place to hide. He runs towards
     the stage as--


8    EXT. THE ROSE THEATER - CONTINUOUS                            8

     About a dozen uniformed guards reach the door. They
     are led by Sir Richard POLE (40), Captain of the Guard.

                            POLE
               Break it down!

     And several of the guards charge the door with their
     pikes, HITTING it hard.

                            POLE (CONT'D)
               Again!


9    INT. THE ROSE THEATER - CONTINUOUS                            9

     Jonson hurries backstage, and disappears from our view
     just as--


10   EXT/INT. THE ROSE THEATER - CONTINUOUS                    10

     --the guards SMASH the door open.    Pole is the first
     in.

                             POLE
               Jonson!   Jonson!!    Show yourself!

     The soldiers immediately spread out into different
     parts of the theater. Jonson's gone. Because--

     JONSON

     has moved under the stage silently scurrying like a rat
     trying to find a place to hide among the stacks of
     props and costumes (swords, masks, flags and banners,
     shields, barrels, canons, etc.) But Jonson freezes
     when he sees--

                                                               4
                                                pg. 5


THROUGH THE CRACKS OF THE STAGE'S FLOORBOARDS

--the soldiers jump onto the stage and spread out, Pole
amongst them.

                          POLE (CONT'D)
            Out with you! Jonson! We'll smoke
            you out like a rat if we have to!
                   (beat)
            Jonson?! Jonson!!

Nothing.    A beat, then--

                         POLE (CONT'D)
                   (to a soldier)
            Torch it.

The soldier hesitates.

                          POLE (CONT'D)
            Torch it!   All of you!

The soldiers obey, lighting fire to the walls, the
galleries, the columns as--

JONSON

GASPS in horror. Desperate-- he spies an open metal
box nearby filled with un-used fireworks.

He tosses the fireworks out of the box-- and then
places the bound manuscripts in their place, then
closes the box. Then-- he grabs a nearby rapier as--

FLAMES

--begin to take hold everywhere: the columns at the
front of the stage... the trompe-l'oeil walls... the
seating galleries... the columns...

A TRAP DOOR

opens center-stage, and Jonson JUMPS out, the rapier in
his right hand, ready for a fight. But-- three
soldiers jump onto the stage, pikes ready.

Jonson-- no fool- turns and runs for the other end of
the stage-- but then runs smack into four other
soldiers!

Ballocks!

Jonson turns this way and that-- nowhere to run-- grins
wryly, drops his sword. Raises his hands in surrender.

                                                          5
                                                      pg. 6


11   EXT. THE ROSE THEATER - NIGHT                            11

     Jonson, his hands tied behind him, is pushed through
     the door, Pole following.

     A small crowd of actors, whores, etc., watch the
     theater burn. The guards have to push their way
     through them.

     INSERT

     The fire reaches the fireworks below the theater's
     stage, and--

     BACK TO SCENE

     -- the SOUND of fireworks EXPLODING makes Jonson turn
     and see:

     THE THEATER

     Timbers CRASH and fireworks EXPLODE over the theater.


12   EXT. THE THAMES RIVER - DAWN                             12

     A longboat carrying Jonson, Pole and the guards makes
     its way towards the Tower Of London.


13   INT. TOWER OF LONDON - AN INTERROGATION ROOM - DAWN      13

     Jonson is thrown into a chair, a guard on either side
     of him. It's dark-- the only light coming from a few
     torches in the walls, and a large fire pit at the far
     side of the room.

     An INTERROGATOR (30's) faces him.   Dressed all in
     black, he is wispy thin.

                            INTERROGATOR
               You are Benjamin Jonson, playwright?
               Son of William Jonson, glass-blower,
               son of James Jonson brick-layer?

     Jonson nods.

                            INTERROGATOR (CONT'D)
               And have you ever been arrested
               before, Mr. Jonson?

                            JONSON
               I'm a writer, aren't I?   Of course
               I've bloody well been--

                                                              6
                                                     pg. 7


And a guard BACKHANDS Jonson on the face full force--
hard enough to send Jonson and the chair to the ground.
His nose starts to bleed.

As the Guards pull him up, the Interrogator looks
across the room-- there is someone else there, a
FIGURE, watching, but cloaked in the darkness.

Jonson notices the figure as well.      We hear a voice
from the darkness.

                          FIGURE
             Ask him about the plays.

                            JONSON
                      (to the Interrogator)
             Plays?
                    (to the Figure)
             Which would you prefer, my lord? A
             pastoral? An historical? An
             historical-pastoral, or an hysterical
             historical pastoral--

And SMACK!    He's hit by the guards again.   He SPITS out
a tooth.

                          INTERROGATOR
             We are not interested in your plays,
             Jonson. We are interested in the
             plays given to you by Edward de Vere,
             Earl of Oxford.

Jonson stares at him a beat, and then looks into the
darkness.

                          JONSON
             I'm sorry my lord, but I am not sure I
             know whereof you speak. I have had
             the honor of meeting his lordship--

And SMACK--

                                              FLASH CUT TO:

FACES

laughing. Not in this room, somewhere else. Somewhere
outside. Before we really understand what we are
seeing we are:

BACK IN THE CELL

Jonson blinks, trying to stay conscious.      His mouth is
ripped, bleeding. So is his nose.

                                                              7
                                                       pg. 8


     The skin has broken on his forehead.     The Interrogator
     leans into the bloody Jonson.

                               INTERROGATOR
                  Where are the plays?

     Before Jonson even has a chance to answer-- SMACK!

                                                        CUT TO:

     MORE FACES

     Laughing.    We are:


14   INT. THE ROSE THEATER - DAY                                  14

     And it is nine years earlier. The faces come from an
     audience watching a play. They find the performance
     hysterical.


15   EXT. ROSE THEATER/BANKSIDE LONDON - CONTINUOUS               15

     The Rose towers above the nearby buildings "Bankside"
     (the part of London that houses the theaters,
     whorehouses, etc.).

     The Rose towers above the nearby buildings "Bankside"
     (the part of London that houses the theaters,
     whorehouses, etc.).

                              SOUTHAMPTON (O.S.)
                  Well?

     TWO MEN

     walk towards the theater. Edward de Vere (47), the
     Earl of OXFORD, an intensely handsome man. His clothes
     have seen better days.

     His companion is Henry Wriothesley, Earl of SOUTHAMPTON
     (22). Blonde, attractive, a bit of a pretty boy-- and
     extremely enthusiastic.

                               SOUTHAMPTON (CONT'D)
                  Wonderful, isn't it?

                               OXFORD
                         (frowning slightly)
                  Well, it's certainly... big.




                                                                  8
                                                  pg. 9


                       SOUTHAMPTON
          I promise you, Edward, you've seen
          nothing like it before! Nothing!

                       OXFORD
          Bricklayers and whores watching
          Aristophones?   You're quite right,
          Henry, not only have I never witnessed
          it, I'm not sure I care to.

                       SOUTHAMPTON
                 (teasing)
          You're an elitist, you know that,
          Edward?

Oxford pauses at the entrance.

                       OXFORD
          There won't be puppets, will there?

Southampton grins and gives a few coins to an USHER,
who escorts the two of them (the retainers stay
outside) inside.

                        USHER
          My lords...


INT. THE ENTRY OF THE ROSE THEATER - CONTINUOUS

The usher takes them up a flight of stairs.    Oxford
observes everything as they walk.

                       SOUTHAMPTON
          The stage-craft is quite spectacular.
          Far more elaborate than anything I've
          seen at court. I've witnessed be-
          headings that god as my witness look
          as real as at the Tower, cannons fired
          in battle...

They come to the second floor, where a SELLING-MAID has
a box of food and drink in front of her bosom-- much
like a match-stick girl.

                        SELLING-MAID
          Ale?   Mutton, mi' lord?

Southampton waves her off as they follow the usher up
another flight of stairs.




                                                          9
                                                   pg. 10


                        SOUTHAMPTON
           ...and last week, they had some sort
           of a device to hoist cherubs into the
           air and fly over the entire audience!

                        OXFORD
           An ap� mekhanes the�s. Deus ex
           machina. Machine of the Gods.

And as they ascend up more stairs, Oxford catches
glimpses of the stage and performance through the
rafters and over the heads of the attending audience.

                        OXFORD (CONT'D)
           Whenever the Greeks wrote their heroes
           into a situation from which they
           couldn't write their way out--

Oxford is becoming intrigued by the theater, almost
despite himself.

                        OXFORD (CONT'D)
           --Out came the ap� mekhanes the�s...
           As when Hippolytus is saved by
           Artemis, or Medea flown to Athens...
           Always good for an ap� mekhanes the�s
           was Euripides

Oxford continues up, two steps behind Southampton.

They come to the third floor and enter the box seating
area reserved for nobles, giving Oxford his first real
look at the theater itself. Oxford looks around and
sees-

FROM OXFORD'S POV

Audience members LAUGHING-- others DRINKING-- maids
SELLING food-- the actors ACTING...

It's alive.   Magical.

BACK TO OXFORD

Oxford takes it all in, almost stunned by it.

ON-STAGE

The actor William SHAKESPEARE (30) plays a commoner.
He is handsome, sexy, charismatic; and holds a tankard
of ale, and SWIGS from it constantly.

Another actor SPENCER (30) plays "FASTIDIOUS"; a
pompous, over-dressed, caricature of a nobleman.

                                                            10
                                                    pg. 11


He wears an enormous feather on his hat. Also on stage
is an actor called John HEMINGE (late 40's), who plays
"Sogliardo"

                         SHAKESPEARE
            And whither were you riding now,
            signior?

                         "FASTIDIOUS"
            Who, I? What a silly jest's that!
            Whither should I ride but to the
            court?

                         SHAKESPEARE
            O, pardon me, sir, twenty places more;
            your hot-house, your pig-house, or
            your whore-house!

The audience ROARS in laughter as Shakespeare looks
below at a buxom young lady among the "groundlings".
He smiles seductively. She smiles back.

BACKSTAGE

Jonson (now 25 and clean-shaven) is watching the
performance from behind a curtain, silently speaking
the lines with the actors.

IN THE RAISED SEATING

A group of playwrights and poets watch the play with an
air of judgement. They are: Christopher "Kit" MARLOWE
(32), young, brilliant, a bit foppish (he likes the
boys), Thomas NASHE (late 30's)-- a heavy-set, a hard
drinking satirist-- and Thomas DEKKER (29), considered
a bit of a hack by his colleagues.

They are called the "Mermaid's Wits" because they
frequent a pub named The Mermaid's Tavern.

                         NASHE
                   (takes a swig of ale)
            His second play, and almost a full
            house.
                   (burps)
            He's got a wit, does Jonson.

                         MARLOWE
            That might be so, but like a grain of
            wheat hid in a bushel of chaff: you
            shall seek all day ere you find it,
            and when you have it, it's not worth
            the search!


                                                             11
                                                 pg. 12


The others smile as a WOMAN passes.

                         WOMAN
          Ale!   Ale!!

                       DEKKER
          Marlowe-- spot me a few pence, will
          you? Henslowe still owes me for
          "Shoemaker's Holiday".

                       MARLOWE
                 (retrieving coins)
          That would be because no one saw
          "Shoemaker's Holiday".

                         DEKKER
          Ale here!

Marlowe gives the woman a few pennies as--

                       NASHE
          Kit... Isn't that one of your
          unrequited loves in the box over
          there?

Marlowe glances across the theater and spots
Southampton siting next to Oxford.

                       MARLOWE
                 (frowns)
          But with whom? Tell me not he prefers
          the company of such old grey men as
          that!

Nashe squints.

                       NASHE
          I think-- yes, by the beard, that's
          the Earl of Oxford. Old Tom Hooker
          used to play for him. Had his own
          acting troupe for private Court
          performances and the like.

                       DEKKER
          I wonder if he needs any material?

                       MARLOWE
          Certainly not any of yours.

                       NASHE
          No, no-- that was years ago. Had a
          falling out with the Queen, I heard.
          He's more of a recluse than a patron
          these days.

                                                          12
                                                     pg. 13


ON STAGE

Shakespeare points to "Fastidious".

                          SHAKESPEARE
             Who, he, the noble there? Why, he's a
             gull, a fool, no salt in him i' the
             earth; man, he looks like a fresh
             salmon kept in a tub!

Shakespeare struts around as though he owned the place.
The more he talks, the more the audience ROARS in
laughter.

                          SHAKESPEARE (CONT'D)
             He sleeps with a musk-cat every night,
             and walks all day hang'd in perfumed
             chains for penance.

                           A GROUNDLING
             Oi!   So that's what I been smelling!

More groundlings laugh.     Interestingly--

NOBLEMEN

in the box seats do not.

ON STAGE

Shakespeare continues his rant, speaking directly to
the groundlings.

                          SHAKESPEARE
             He has his skin tann'd in civet, to
             make his complexion strong, and the
             sweetness of his youth lasting in the
             sense of his sweet lady. And, sadly,
             the poor man's brain is lighter than
             his feather...

As the audience HOWLS in laughter, we see:

A NOBLEMAN

with a feathered hat gets up in fury, and exits the
theater, his lady with him. The Audience LAUGHS at him
as he goes.

ON STAGE

Shakespeare smiles triumphantly.



                                                              13
                                                   pg. 14


                         SHAKESPEARE (CONT'D)
            He is a good and empty puff, but he
            loves you well, signior. I wish you
            well with him.

OXFORD

Watches the nobleman with the big feathered hat pass
by.

BACKSTAGE

Later in the play...

Shakespeare returns backstage and takes a deep swig
from his tankard. He's actually drunk, though his
performance didn't show it at all. He spots Jonson,
and grabs him.

                        SHAKESPEARE (CONT'D)
            Jonson! Wonderful dialogue!
            Wonderful. I hope your next--

                          HENSLOWE (O.C.)
            Will!   Will Shakespeare!

Shakespeare turns to see a furious Philip HENSLOWE
(50'S) heading his way.

                         HENSLOWE (CONT'D)
            That's not ale in that goblet is it?

Shakespeare hides the goblet behind his back.

                         SHAKESPEARE
            Ale? Me? Drink during a performance?
            I am a professional sir!
                   (burps)
            A complete and--

He is interrupted by SCREAMS.    Not from actors on
stage, but by the audience.

IN THE THEATER

Complete panic erupts as dozens of The Queen's Guard
STORM into the theater. Everyone tries to get out as
quickly as possible, including the other actors, Henry
CONDELL (20's), Thomas POPE (30's), William SLY (13).

SIR RICHARD POLE, THE CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD

--jumps on stage.


                                                            14
                                                    pg. 15


                        POLE
           This play has been declared seditious
           and illegal by Lord William Cecil!

The audience begins to BOO at the mention of Cecil.

                        POLE (CONT'D)
           All are herewith ordered to disperse
           immediately!

                        A GROUNDLING
           Why don't you disperse William Cecil's
           arse!

                        POLE
           Arrest that man!

IN OXFORD'S BOX

                          SOUTHAMPTON
           Damn it all.    Well! Off to Essex's
           then?

He gets up. Oxford does not, seemingly interested in
the real drama below as everyone hurries from the
theater.

                          SOUTHAMPTON (CONT'D)
           Edward?

Oxford turns to him, distracted, and nods.

ON STAGE

Jonson pushes his way on stage.

                        JONSON
                  (to Pole)
           Seditious? Seditious?! It's a comedy
           for god's sake! There's nothing
           seditious about--

                        POLE
           Oi, is that right, is it?    And you
           know this because?

                        JONSON
           Because I wrote the bloody thing!      And-
           -

                        POLE
           Arrest him as well!

Jonson is grabbed by guards.

                                                             15
                                                       pg. 16


17   INT. A JAIL CELL - DAY                                        17

     Jonson is THROWN into the cell, the door SLAMMED behind
     him.

                             JONSON
                      (to the door)
               A pox on you!
                      (beat)
               And your carbuncled father!

     Jonson looks around-- the cell is filled with a dozen
     or so other prisoners.

                            ESSEX (O.S.)
               People taxed to the point of
               starvation, Spain running the New
               World, open revolt in Ireland,
               Catholic plots everywhere you turn...

                                                        CUT TO:


18   INT. TENNIS COURT AT ESSEX HOUSE - DAY                        18

     Robert, Earl of ESSEX (28), is playing tennis against
     Southampton. He's handsome, red-headed, and, we will
     learn, very ambitious.

                            ESSEX
               ...and how do the Cecils spend their
               time and energy? Shutting a theater!
               A theater, for god's sake? It's
               madness! No wonder the mob hates them
               so!

     The court is inside, and slightly different from
     today's game: the back walls are playable, somewhat
     like racquet-ball.

     Oxford sits on a bench, watching.   Essex SLAMS a shot,
     but it goes--

                              OXFORD
               Out!

     Essex looks furious, but holds his tongue.   Southampton
     prepares to serve.

                            OXFORD (CONT'D)
                      (to Southampton)
               Henry, how many people were at that
               play?


                                                                  16
                                                     pg. 17


     Southampton pauses before serving.

                           SOUTHAMPTON
               Hmm? I'm not sure, two thousand,
               maybe more.

     Southampton SERVES.   Essex returns, and another heated
     rally begins.

                            OXFORD
               And how many performances are there of
               a play like that?

                            SOUTHAMPTON
               Five or six I suppose.

     He HITS the ball again, and this time Essex misses it.

                             ESSEX
               By the--!

                            OXFORD
                      (to Essex)
               So! Ten thousand souls. All
               listening to the writings of one man--
               the ideas of one man. That's power,
               Robert. And if there is one thing the
               Cecils understand, it's power.

                            ESSEX
                      (snorts)
               And when did words ever win a kingdom?
               I think I'll keep my sword, thank you
               very much.

     Southampton SERVES as Oxford smiles at Essex's naivet�.


19   INT. CHANGING ROOMS/ESSEX HOUSE - DAY                      19

     Southampton and Essex are dressing out of their tennis
     clothes and into their normal clothes, assisted by two
     valets.

                            ESSEX
                      (to the valets)
               Leave us.
                      (they exit)
               Henry... Some of my men have...
               intercepted... some of William Cecil's
               recent correspondence with King James
               of Scotland...



                                                               17
                                                 pg. 18


Southampton pauses in clothing himself.   This is
serious.

                       ESSEX (CONT'D)
          Cecil's all but promising him the
          throne...

                        SOUTHAMPTON
          To James?   Elizabeth would never agree
          to-

                       ESSEX
          Elizabeth is old. Ill. Not of her
          old mind. Sometimes she doesn't even
          recognize me. And yet, still she
          refuses to name an heir.

                       SOUTHAMPTON
          But a Scotsman? On the Tudor throne?

                       ESSEX
          You are not in the Privy Council.
          Elizabeth does everything the Cecils
          wish of her. Everything!

BEHIND THEM

Oxford enters. They don't notice, though. He
instantly realizes he shouldn't say anything. He
listens as:

WIDER

                        ESSEX (CONT'D)
          Think, Henry, if James owes Cecil his
          throne, Cecil will have more influence
          in the next reign than he does in this
          one. And after William Cecil, his
          hunch-backed son will take his
          place...
                 (careful)
          That is why we must do everything in
          our power to ensure that the right man
          succeeds her.
                 (beat)
          A man deserving of the Tudor crown.

Southampton stiffens at that last phrase.

                       ESSEX (CONT'D)
          I ask you for the support of you and
          your men, Henry.... if it comes to a
          fight.


                                                          18
                                                       pg. 19


     Southampton looks at Essex hard.

                             SOUTHAMPTON
                You know you need not ask. I stand
                with you, as I always have.

     Essex smiles at him warmly. They both HEAR something
     shuffle behind them. They turn, and see:

     WHERE OXFORD WAS STANDING

     Nothing.   He is gone.

     BACK TO SOUTHAMPTON AND ESSEX

     They exchange a slightly worried look.

                                                         CUT TO:


20   EXT. ESSEX HOUSE - DAY                                         20

     Moments later, Oxford and Southampton are exiting the
     elaborate building that serves as Essex's London
     residence.

                             OXFORD
                Essex played rather poorly, didn't he?

     Southampton just nods, distracted.   Oxford reaches out
     to him, and touches his shoulder.

                             OXFORD (CONT'D)
                       (warning)
                Henry... The Cecils brook no rivals.

     Southampton pauses, confused for an instant, then--

                             SOUTHAMPTON
                       (re: his discussion with
                        Essex)
                You heard?

     Oxford nods.

                             SOUTHAMPTON (CONT'D)
                Always concerned for me, aren't you
                Edward?

     They keep walking towards Southampton's men.

                             SOUTHAMPTON (CONT'D)
                And what would you have me do?


                                                                   19
                                                  pg. 20


                       OXFORD
          I would have you deny him.

                       SOUTHAMPTON
          The son of the Queen?

                       OXFORD
          That is rumor only, Henry--

They stop. Southampton makes sure that his men are out
of earshot.

                       SOUTHAMPTON
          Rumor? My god, all you have to do is
          look at Essex to see the Queen's
          reflection. Everyone thinks he's her
          son, everyone! And I for one would
          rather bow to a Tudor, bastard though
          he may be, than a Scotsman!

                        OXFORD
          I desire nothing more than to see the
          next king be the rightful king. But
          what Essex contemplates will surely
          lead to Civil War.
                 (beat)
          No. If this is to be done, it must be
          done carefully, skillfully.

                       SOUTHAMPTON
          As I heard it, Elizabeth exiled you
          from her presence for the last twenty
          years because of your "skill" at Court
          politics.

And then he feels instantly ashamed of having said
that.

                       OXFORD
          I only have your interests in mind,
          Henry. For as you so rightly point
          out, my interests are already lost.

                       SOUTHAMPTON
          I know. Forgive me. You know how I
          feel about you. You have been a great
          friend to me ever since my father
          died. I promise you that I will do
          nothing rash without consulting you
          first.

Oxford nods, still worried, and Southampton heads for
his horse.


                                                           20
                                                      pg. 21


                            OXFORD
               Henry! Will you do me one thing more?
               Deliver a gift for me? A rather...
               elaborate gift?


21   EXT. CECIL HOUSE - SUNSET                                  21

     The stone house is nothing like a stereotypical Tudor
     house; it's enormous, and very ornate and intricate in
     design.

     It faces the river, and has an elaborate docking area
     which is now filled with all sorts of longboats letting
     the noblemen off for a week-end get away.


22   INT. CECIL HOUSE - GREAT HALL - DUSK                       22

     Most of England's nobility is assembled in small
     groups, talking. It's a dour, quiet affair. Some
     music, no life. Quite Puritan.

     Southampton is there, but Essex and Oxford are nowhere
     to be seen.

     A HUNCH-BACKED MAN

     --makes his way through the room, causing conversations
     to cease as he walks by. Even the most senior of the
     nobles bow their heads slightly in greeting him. This
     is Sir ROBERT CECIL (mid 30's).

     He pauses near Southampton.

                              SOUTHAMPTON
               Sir Robert.

                            ROBERT CECIL
               My lord of Southampton.
                      (looking around)
               Have you seen Essex?

                            SOUTHAMPTON
               I believe he is still in the viewing
               chamber with her majesty...

                              ROBERT CECIL
                        (sharp, annoyed)
               Alone?




                                                               21
                                                  pg. 22


                       SOUTHAMPTON
                 (smiles)
          With your father in London dealing
          with all the troubles in Ireland, who
          else should the Queen turn to but
          Essex?

Robert Cecil looks annoyed, but holds his tongue as the
SOUND of pikes HITTING the floor silences the hall.

A FOOTMAN clears his throat and--

                       FOOTMAN
          By the grace of god, her majesty,
          Elizabeth, Queen of England, Wales and
          Ireland!

DOUBLE DOORS

open, and Elizabeth (in her 60's) enters. She is
wearing a large sparkling pearl-encrusted dress with a
wide collar.

She walks slowly and carefully, and has a slight tremor
in her head and hands. She seems un-certain; like
she's not sure she recognizes all the faces around her
(Alzheimer's?). And she compensates for it by being
all the more regal, all the more un-human.

Essex is on her arm, dressed in a splendid jewel-
encrusted doublet.

Robert Cecil FROWNS at the sight of Essex on her arm.

Essex ignores Cecil's glare, notices Southampton--

                       ESSEX
                 (to Elizabeth)
          Ah-- Majesty, I've been told my lord
          of Southampton has a gift for you.

                       ELIZABETH
                 (eyes sparkle)
          A gift?

                       SOUTHAMPTON
          Yes, your grace, though not from me.

Southampton CLAPS his hands and a door across the room
OPENS.

A DWARF enters, followed by dancing faires, actors
swirling sparklers, and musicians playing music.


                                                           22
                                                  pg. 23


Elizabeth's rheumy eyes widen in complete delight, a
smile of total jubilation crosses her face.

Robert Cecil, on the other hand, looks horrified.

                       ELIZABETH
          Are you this gift, my precious little
          man?

                       DWARF
          No, no, my most majestic majesty. I
          am a free man. My gift is a play,
          majesty.

                       ELIZABETH
          A play?

The dwarf bows his assent.

                       ROBERT CECIL
                 (to the Dwarf)
          Plays are the work of the devil, born
          from a cesspool of plague, whoredom,
          thievery, fornication, and heresy.
          You may tell your master that her
          majesty--

                       ESSEX
                 (interrupting)
          --Will gladly accept your gift.

Robert Cecil turns to Essex, shocked.

                       ESSEX (CONT'D)
                 (to Elizabeth)
          Of course that is if you so desire,
          majesty.
                 (to Robert Cecil)
          The choice is her majesty's to make,
          not yours. Is that not so Sir Robert?

Robert frowns as Elizabeth looks around, unsure of the
political tides around her. Then--

                       ELIZABETH
                 (to the dwarf)
          Comedy? Or tragedy?